Undraft APIs document (#20)
tikv/website: content/docs/apis.md

title: APIs
description: Interact with TiKV using the raw key-value API or the transactional key-value API
weight: 4
draft: false
---

TiKV offers two APIs that you can use to interact with it:

API | Description | Atomicity | Use when...
:---|:------------|:----------|:-----------
[Raw](#raw) | A lower-level key-value API for interacting directly with individual key-value pairs. | Single key | Your application doesn't require distributed transactions or multi-version concurrency control (MVCC)
[Transactional](#transactional) | A higher-level key-value API that provides ACID semantics | Multiple keys | Your application requires distributed transactions and/or MVCC

{{< info >}}
It is **not recommended or supported** to use both the raw and transactional APIs on the same keyspace.
{{< /info >}}
There are several clients that connect to TiKV:

* [Rust](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust)
* [Java](https://github.com/tikv/client-java)
* [Go](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/store/tikv)

Below we use the Rust client for some examples, but you should find all clients work similarly.

## Connecting a Client

> This guide assumes you are using Rust and have Rust installed through `rustup` or other means.

Reviewer: Should mention that we'll be using nightly and the 2018 edition

Author: In this guide stable Rust is assumed.

Reviewer: Hmm, I thought futures were still unstable? Maybe I'm just thinking of async/await

> To start, open the `Cargo.toml` of your project and add the `tikv-client` as a dependency. You'll also need to depend on `futures`.

Reviewer: Is there no sync API? We should fix that if not :-)

Author: There is not! A sync API not just introduce a `.wait()` internally instead?

Reviewer: Maybe, we might be able to do slightly better than that by 'batching'

Author: Maybe! You're encouraged to write an RFC about this. But this isn't a blocker on this PR. I'll resolve this.

<!-- TODO: Use crates.to once published -->

```toml

> [dependencies]

Reviewer: Maybe worth adding the `edition = "2018"` line

Author: Since we're saying we expect you're using Rust >=1.31 now it doesn't matter what edition they're using.

Reviewer: I don't think that is right - you still have to opt-in to the 2018 edition. If they don't do that, they'll need `extern crate`s.

tikv-client = { git = "https://github.com/tikv/client-rust" }

> futures = "0.1"

Reviewer: :-( We should be using 0.3

Author: Agreed but that's out of scope for a tutorial.

```

In your `src/main.rs` you can then import the raw API as well as the functionality of the `Future` trait so you can utilize it.

In this example we used `raw`, but you can also use `transaction`. The process is the same.

```rust
use tikv_client::{Config, raw::Client}
use futures::Future;
```

> After building a `Config`, you can then create a `Client`.

Reviewer: Grammar nit, I would say something like 'First we build a `Config`'. Starting with `After ..` makes me feel like I've missed the config paragraph

```rust
let config = Config::new(vec![ // Use more than one PD endpoint!
    "192.168.0.100:2379",
    "192.168.0.101:2379",
    "192.168.0.102:2379",
]).with_security(              // If using TLS.
    "root.ca",
    "internal.cert",

>     "internal.key",

Reviewer: Are these actual values a user might use or dummy values. I feel like this call either needs some explanation or you should just do an insecure version and mention that in production you should use `with_security`.

Author: We detail this on https://tikv.org/docs/security/ already. Do you still want it here as well?

Reviewer: No, that is fine

);

let unconnected_client = Client::new(config);
```

> The value returned at this point is a `Future`. It needs to be resolved before we can directly make calls. If your application is syncronous you can call`.wait()` to block the current task until the future is resolved. If your application is asyncronous you might have better ways of dealing with this.

Reviewer: It would be good to say why its a future - what are we waiting for?

```rust
let client = unconnected_client.wait()?; // Block and resolve the future.
```

With a connected client, you'll be able to make requests from TiKV. This client supports both singlular or batch operations.

You can find the full documentation for the client (and all your dependencies) by running:

<!-- TODO: Link to docs.rs page once published -->

```bash
cargo doc --package tikv-client --open
```

## Raw key-value API {#raw}

Using a connected `raw::Client` you can perform actions such as basic `put`, `get`, and `delete`:

```rust

> // `Key` and `Value` wrap around `Vec<u8>` values.

Reviewer: See below about Value and Key. From the code `key` and `value` look like they are `Vec<u8>`, not wrapped around that.

// This means data does not need to be UTF-8.
let key = "TiKV".to_bytes();
let value = "Astronaut".to_bytes();

// This creates a future that must be resolved.
let req = client.put(key, value);
req.wait()?;

let req = client.get(key);
let result = req.wait()?;

// `Value` and `Key` deref to `Vec<u8>`.

> // They should feel natural to work with.

Reviewer: What are `Value` and `Key`? They are not present in the code.

Reviewer: I don't think that `They should feel natural to work with.` adds much value.

Author: You're right, this is unclear.

assert_eq!(result, Some(value));

let req = client.delete(key);
req.wait()?;

let req = client.get(key).wait()?;

> assert_eq!(result, None);

Reviewer: Would it be possible to update the client to futures 0.3, and then use `async`/`await` in the examples? It would make them much cleaner.

Author: We're not on nightly so we don't get async/await.

```

> You can also perform `scan`s:

Reviewer: Perhaps say what a scan is.

```rust
// For stability and reliability, it's good to chose a reasonable limit.
const REASONABLE_LIMIT = 1000;
// If you are using UTF-8,`Key` and `Value` arguments can be provided as
// `String` or `&'static str` as well.
const (START, END) = ("C", "F");

// Scanning can also work on an open end (Eg `START..`)
let req = client.scan(START..END, REASONABLE_LIMIT);
let result: Vec<Value> = req.wait()?;
```

> These functions also have batch variants which accept sets and return `Vec<_>`s of data. These this offer considerably reduced network overhead and can result in dramatic performance increases under certain workloads.

Reviewer: typo: "These this offer"

For documented, tested examples of all functionalities, check the documentation of `raw::Client` in the generated Rust documentation.

## Transactional key-value API {#transactional}

> The transactional API of the Rust client is incomplete. You can track the progress with [issue #15](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust/issues/15).

Using a connected `transaction::Client` you can then begin a transaction:

```rust

> let txn = client.begin();

Reviewer: May as well add the line or two of boilerplate for creating the Client

Author: We showed them this at the top of the page and adding these ~4 lines would dilute the example to make it harder to see the way to start a transaction. I've added `// Create the client as shown above` instead. Does this work?

title: APIs
description: Interact with TiKV using the raw key-value API or the transactional key-value API
weight: 4
draft: false
---

> TiKV offers two APIs that you can use to interact with it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TiKV offers two APIs that you can interact with:
```

Author: Thanks! You're right, this is better. :)

API | Description | Atomicity | Use when...
:---|:------------|:----------|:-----------
[Raw](#raw) | A lower-level key-value API for interacting directly with individual key-value pairs. | Single key | Your application doesn't require distributed transactions or multi-version concurrency control (MVCC)
[Transactional](#transactional) | A higher-level key-value API that provides ACID semantics | Multiple keys | Your application requires distributed transactions and/or MVCC

{{< info >}}
It is **not recommended or supported** to use both the raw and transactional APIs on the same keyspace.
{{< /info >}}

There are several clients that connect to TiKV:

* [Rust](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust)
* [Java](https://github.com/tikv/client-java)
* [Go](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/store/tikv)

Below we use the Rust client for some examples, but you should find all clients work similarly.

> ## Connecting a Client

Reviewer 2: Use sentence style for headers
```suggestion
## Connect a client
```

> This guide assumes you are using Rust and have Rust (>=1.31) installed through `rustup` or other means. You will also need an already deployed TiKV and PD cluster, since TiKV is not an embedded database.

Reviewer 2: " through `rustup` or other means." Since it's not limited to `rustup`, we may want to save this info.
```suggestion
This guide assumes you are using Rust 1.31 or above. You will also need an already deployed TiKV and PD cluster, since TiKV is not an embedded database.
```

Author: Nice catch!

> To start, open the `Cargo.toml` of your project and add the `tikv-client` as a dependency. You'll also need to depend on `futures`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To start, open the `Cargo.toml` of your project, and add the `tikv-client` and `futures` crates as dependencies.
```

<!-- TODO: Use crates.to once published -->

```toml
[dependencies]
tikv-client = { git = "https://github.com/tikv/client-rust" }
futures = "0.1"
```

In your `src/main.rs` you can then import the raw API as well as the functionality of the `Future` trait so you can utilize it.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make requests to TiKV, take the following steps to connect a client:
```

In this example we used `raw`, but you can also use `transaction`. The process is the same.

```rust
use tikv_client::{Config, raw::Client}
use futures::Future;
```

> Start by building a `Config`, you can create a `Client`.

Reviewer 2: `Config` and `Client` are both variables, right? I think it would be clearer to say a `Config` variable, and a `Client` variable

Author: I'll clarify this. Technically `Config` and `Client` are structures that we're creating instances of.

```rust

> let config = Config::new(vec![ // Use more than one PD endpoint!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
let config = Config::new(vec![ // Uses more than one PD endpoint.
```

    "192.168.0.100:2379",
    "192.168.0.101:2379",
    "192.168.0.102:2379",

> ]).with_security( // If using TLS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
]).with_security( // Configures TLS if used.
```

    "root.ca",
    "internal.cert",
    "internal.key",
);

let unconnected_client = Client::new(config);
```

The value returned at this point is a `Future`. It needs to be resolved before we can directly make calls. This is because the client must create a connection with the cluster.

> If your application is syncronous you can call`.wait()` to block the current task until the future is resolved. If your application is asyncronous you might have better ways of dealing with this.

Reviewer 2: "you might have better ways of dealing with this."
Do we need to describe the "better ways" for clarity?

Author: Added example

```rust
let client = unconnected_client.wait()?; // Block and resolve the future.
```

> With a connected client, you'll be able to make requests from TiKV. This client supports both singlular or batch operations.

Reviewer 2: "you'll be able to make requests from TiKV". By my understanding, aren't we supposed to use the client to make requests **to** TiKV?

Author: Yes 🤦‍♀️

You can find the full documentation for the client (and all your dependencies) by running:

<!-- TODO: Link to docs.rs page once published -->

```bash
cargo doc --package tikv-client --open
```

> ## Basic Types

Reviewer 2: Can we move this section before Connecting a Client? This seems to be reference info amid a streak of operation guides, making the structure less coherent.

Author: I think you're right! :)

title: APIs

> description: Interact with TiKV using the raw key-value API or the transactional key-value API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Interact with TiKV using the Raw Key-Value API or the transactional key-value API
```

Reviewer 2: We may want to unify the API names of Raw Key-Value API and Transactional Key-Value API (initial-capitalized),

Author: I'll do little `raw` and little `transactional` then. :)

weight: 4
draft: false
---

TiKV offers two APIs that you can interact with:

API | Description | Atomicity | Use when...
:---|:------------|:----------|:-----------
[Raw](#raw) | A lower-level key-value API for interacting directly with individual key-value pairs. | Single key | Your application doesn't require distributed transactions or multi-version concurrency control (MVCC)
[Transactional](#transactional) | A higher-level key-value API that provides ACID semantics | Multiple keys | Your application requires distributed transactions and/or MVCC

> {{< info >}}

Author: `{{< info >}}` creates a space like the blue highlighted area at the top of https://tikv.org/docs/.

It is **not recommended or supported** to use both the raw and transactional APIs on the same keyspace.
{{< /info >}}

There are several clients that connect to TiKV:

* [Rust](https://github.com/tikv/client-rust)
* [Java](https://github.com/tikv/client-java)
* [Go](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/store/tikv)

Below we use the Rust client for some examples, but you should find all clients work similarly.

> 

Author: Let's try to keep the document simple, short, and casual. I really, really don't want this to become a reference or exhaustive document. We can't do automated testing on the code here and there is already exhaustive documentation elsewhere.

We only have 6 sections with a couple paragraphs each. If we introduce another header level then we must introduce a little "In this section" formality etc etc etc.

We're just showing a few samples of one of several libraries they can use. Ideally they'll be able to read this page in under 5 minutes.

## Adding the dependency {#dependency}

This guide assumes you are using Rust 1.31 or above. You will also need an already deployed TiKV and PD cluster, since TiKV is not an embedded database.

To start, open the `Cargo.toml` of your project, and add the `tikv-client` and `futures` as dependencies.

<!-- TODO: Use crates.to once published -->

```toml
[dependencies]
tikv-client = { git = "https://github.com/tikv/client-rust" }
futures = "0.1"
```

> ## Basic Types {#types}

Author: It's a anchor for hotlinking. So we can do link to `/docs/apis#types` and have it come here directly.

Both client use a few basic types for most of their API:

* `Key`, a wrapper around a `Vec<u8>` symbolizing the 'key' in a key-value pair.
* `Value`, a wrapper around a `Vec<u8>` symbolizing the 'value' in a key-value pair.
* `KvPair`, a tuple of `(Key, Value)` representing a key-value pair.
* `KeyRange`, a trait representing a range of `Key`s from one value to either another value, or the end of the entire dataset.

The `Key` and `Value` types implement `Deref<Target=Vec<u8>>` so they can generally be used just like their contained values. Where possible API calls accept `impl Into<T>` instead of the type `T` when it comes to `Key`, `Value`, and `KvPair`.

If you're using your own key or value types, we reccomend implementing `Into<Key>` and/or `Into<Value>` for them where appropriate. You can also `impl KeyRange` if you have any range types.

## Connect a client {#connnect}

> In your `src/main.rs` you can then import the raw API as well as the functionality of the `Future` trait so you can utilize it.

Author: :+1: Great suggestion.

> *Note:* In this example we used `raw`, but you can also use `transaction`. The process is the same.

Author: Ok!

```rust
use tikv_client::{Config, raw::Client}
use futures::Future;
```

> Build an instance of `Config` then using it to build an instance of a `Client`.

Reviewer 2: A grammar error here
```suggestion
Build an instance of `Config`, then use it to build an instance of a `Client`.
```

```rust
let config = Config::new(vec![ // Always use more than one PD endpoint!
    "192.168.0.100:2379",
    "192.168.0.101:2379",
    "192.168.0.102:2379",
]).with_security( // Configure TLS if used.
    "root.ca",
    "internal.cert",
    "internal.key",
);

let unconnected_client = Client::new(config);
let client = unconnected_client.wait()?; // Block and resolve the future.
```

The value returned by `Client::new` is a `Future`. Futures need to be resolved in order to obtain the output. During the resolution of the future the client must create a connection with the cluster.

{{< info >}}
If your application is syncronous you can call `.wait()` to block the current task until the future is resolved. If your application is asyncronous you might have better ways (eg. a Tokio reactor) of dealing with this.
{{< /info >}}

With a connected client, you'll be able to send requests to TiKV. This client supports both singlular or batch operations.

> ## Raw key-value API {#raw}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Use the raw key-value API {#raw}
```

let req = client.put(
    key,  // Vec<u8> impl Into<Key>
    value // Vec<u8> impl Into<Value>
);
req.wait()?;

let req = client.get(key);
let result = req.wait()?;

// `Value` derefs to `Vec<u8>`.
assert_eq!(result, Some(value));

let req = client.delete(key);
req.wait()?;

let req = client.get(key).wait()?;
assert_eq!(result, None);
```

You can also perform `scan`s, giving you all the values for keys in a given range:

```rust
// For stability and reliability, it's good to chose a reasonable limit.
const REASONABLE_LIMIT = 1000;
// If you are using UTF-8,`Key` and `Value` arguments can be provided as
// `String` or `&'static str` as well.
const (START, END) = ("C", "F");

// Scanning can also work on an open end (Eg `START..`)
let req = client.scan(START..END, REASONABLE_LIMIT);
let result: Vec<KvPair> = req.wait()?;
```

These functions also have batch variants which accept sets and return `Vec<_>`s of data. These offer considerably reduced network overhead and can result in dramatic performance increases under certain workloads.

For documented, tested examples of all functionalities, check the documentation of `raw::Client` in the generated Rust documentation.

> ## Transactional key-value API {#transactional}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Use the transactional key-value API {#transactional}
```

Using a connected `transaction::Client` you can then begin a transaction:

```rust
let client = Client::new(config).wait();
let txn = client.begin();
```

Then it's possible to send commands like `get`, `set`, `delete`, or `scan`. Batch variants also exist.

```rust
// `Key` and `Value` wrap around `Vec<u8>` values.
// This means data need not be UTF-8.
let key = "TiKV".to_bytes();
let value = "Astronaut".to_bytes();

// This creates a future that must be resolved.
let req = txn.set(key, value);
req.wait()?;

let req = txn.get(key);
let result = req.wait()?;

// `Value` and `Key` deref to `Vec<u8>`.
// This means you should find them easy to work with.
assert_eq!(result, Some(value));

let req = txn.delete(key);
req.wait()?;

let req = txn.get(key).wait()?;
assert_eq!(result, None);

// For more detail on scanning, see the raw section above or the documentation.
let req = client.scan("A".."B", 1000);
let result: Vec<KvPair> = req.wait()?;
```

> When you're ready to commit these changes, you can commit the change, if you'd preferable to abort the operation you can rollback:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion 
Commit these changes when you're ready, or roll back if you prefer to abort the operation:
```
